In this lesson you're going to learn how to render messages to the browser window as opposed to having
them show up down below in the terminal.
Now to get this done we'll be using the very popular mustache templating library that's gonna give us
everything we need to define HDL templates and render them with our data from javascript so we'll be
able to render all sorts of dynamic content to the page.
The first thing we're gonna do is move into index Don HCM CML and we'll be setting up a new script tag
to load in the library that we're going to need and we can find that over in the browser.
So all of the libraries we'll be using for the chat application I've put together at the following link
that is links dot Mead dot I O forward slash chat libs.
If you visit this it's going to redirect you over to a get hub Gist and this contains a few different
script tags with three libraries.
Now we're only going to use one of them in this lesson we'll use the other two shortly though.
So I figured we might as well just grab them all right now.
The first library is mustache which we'll be using in this lesson to render our templates and the next
library is moment which we'll be using to manipulate time and show the time a message was sent in the
browser window.
And finally Q S which stands for query string and that's going to allow us to setup room names and user
names a bit later in the section.
Now once again we'll talk about all of these libraries in detail when we start to use them.
But for now let's grab all three script tags and bring them over to index dot H2 UML.
Right here what I'm going to do is paste them in right up top.
So I loaded my libraries I load in socket dot I O then I load in my custom javascript code.
Now here we're loading all of the libraries in via CDM J.S. dot com that is a C the N for JavaScript
libraries.
If you wanted to you could also choose to download all of these files and include them in your public
directory and then load them in like we did with our chat dot in J.S. file.
Now let's go ahead and create our very first template and that's gonna happen right here inside of index
dot HDL.
We can define a template and then we can render it as many times as we need to.
Now this template is going to be for an individual message which means we'll be using this template
multiple times for every single message that needs to get shown to the user.
Now to actually create the template what we do is we setup a script tag which might seem a bit weird
at first but bear with me for the moment we're going to set up a script tag and inside of here we're
gonna end up putting HDMI all.
So for example I can create a div element right here opening and closing it and then inside of there
I could create a paragraph as well with some text like this is a message I'll go ahead and close that
paragraph.
And now what we're gonna do is set up a couple actually buttes on script to get all of this working.
The first thing we're gonna do for all of our templates is define an I.D. a way to target this template
from chat dot J.S. in just a few moments right here.
I'm going to call this one message hyphen template.
I like to end all of my templates with template.
Just to be explicit about what exactly it is.
And next up we're going to set type equal to text forward slash HDL to let the browser know that we
have HDL right inside of here for the template now that we have the template created we can actually
use the mustache library to render this somewhere in our application.
Now currently we don't have a good place to put our messages on the screen.
So what I'm gonna do is create one then we'll actually render some inside of here anywhere on the page
just below the title for the page.
What we're going to do is create a div this is just going to be a container for all new messages right
here.
I'll give it the I.D. of messages and we're done.
There's no need to put anything inside of here.
We'll be adding things inside of their dynamically as chat and J.S. goes through the process of getting
new chat messages.
Now with all of this code in place we have made zero changes to how our chat application is going to
render.
If I head over to the browser go to local host three thousand and give things a refresh.
We're not seeing our template code anywhere.
And that's a good thing.
We should not see hard templates by default.
We should only see them when we actually render content.
Now in a few moments we'll learn how to add dynamic values inside of here.
But for the moment let's get this static template rendered now inside of chat Dot.
J ust we have to figure out where it makes sense to render messages and that's right here in these socket
event listener for the message event.
Now in order to render the template we need two important things.
One I need the template itself and two I need access to the place I want to render the template that
is my div up above.
So we're going to end up selecting both of those under elements.
I'll create a single new variable called Dollar Sign messages.
And for this one I'll use document dot query selector once again to grab an element by its I.D..
And in this case messages is going to allow us to grab that div.
Now we also want to grab our template right here.
I'll create a new little section using a comment called templates.
Now for the moment we only have a single one but we'll be adding more as we continue through this section.
And right here we'll create a single constant called message template.
And we're going to do is select that script tag by its I.D..
So that's document dot query selector selecting by I.D. just like we have done plenty of times before.
But in this case the I.D. is the one we put on that script tag which mine was a message hyphen template
matching up exactly with what we have right here.
Now this is going to give us access to that element itself.
What we really need for our templates though is the HCM l contained inside and our elements have an
inner HDMI l property which gives us access to that.
This is what we need in order to render the template correctly.
So we have the template right here and we have the location we want to render the template up above
with both of those in place.
We're now ready to actually render something into the browser when a new message comes in.
Now this is a two step process.
And the first step is to compile our template with the data we want to render inside of it.
Now for the moment this is a static template so it's not too exciting but we have to work through this
step nonetheless and we'll add dynamic data in in just a couple of minutes.
What we're going to do is create a constant called HDMI all this is going to store the final HDMI all
will actually be rendering in the browser.
Then right here we use the mustache library to get it.
That is mustache spelled this way.
I know there are other spellings for mustache depending on where in the world you are but this is the
spelling used by the library.
Then it's dot render followed by the template as the first and only required argument.
Now there are other arguments we'll talk about in just a moment where we can provide the data we want
to use but once again no data just yet.
Now the next line and the final line We're going to add in order to get this to work has to do with
the messages div.
So we have that div and we want to add stuff inside of it.
For that we'll be using the insert adjacent HDL method.
This allows us to insert other t UML adjacent to the element we've selected in this case that message
is div.
And the first argument is a string and right here we have a few different options I have after begin
which would add it just at the top inside of the div.
This would mean that newer messages would show up first.
I also have after end this would be after the element closes so it wouldn't even be the inside of our
messages Div I have before begin which is before that messages div and then I have before end which
is before the messages div end.
So inside of it.
So right here before end would add new messages at the bottom inside of the div and then after begin
would add new messages at the top inside of the div before end is the option we want and then we just
provide the HDL which I have in that variable defined on the line just above.
From here we can now see our template rendered.
So make sure all your files are saved.
Head over to the browser and give things a refresh.
Right here I see this is a message showing up because we got that welcome message from the server.
If I type something else and hit enter we can see our template is rendered a second time.
Now this alone is a good start but it's not particularly useful because what we really want to do is
render the message text inside of there.
Let's go ahead and figure out how we can get that done.
Now over an index dot HDL to do this we'll be making a small change to our template when we're working
with mustache.
There's a syntax we can use to inject values inside.
So first up we find the place we want to put the value for us.
We're going to clear the paragraph tag of any static content and we're going to put the message right
here.
Then we open to curly braces and we close to curly braces.
Inside of there we reference one of the values we pass in.
Now we haven't passed any values in yet but we're about to and we're going to call that message.
So right here we can go ahead and put the message right inside of the paragraph.
So when the mustache library actually compiles this template everything I have highlighted will be replaced
with the value for message.
Now let's go ahead and actually provide a value for message.
So we see something render when a new message comes in.
Over here we provide data for our template as the second argument to render.
This is an object.
And on here we can provide as many key value pairs as we want.
Now the keys are the things we're accessing in the template and in our case we just said we wanted to
access message right here.
That means we need to setup message on this object.
So I'm going to setup message and its value will come from the variable with the same name up above
our function parameter.
And I can just use these shorthand syntax for that.
Perfect.
So now we're passing the data into the template.
Mustache is going to compile things correctly and this time around we should see our dynamic messages
showing up.
What I'm gonna do is save chat not in jail yes and give the browser a refresh.
Once again right here I see welcome which is excellent and I'll type out a message.
This is dynamic.
I'll hit enter and that shows up as well.
So now using mustache and just maybe 12 lines of code we're able to render dynamic templates to the
browser allowing the user to actually see the messages without needing to dig into the Chrome developer
tools.
Now this system works really well for our text based messages but if I try to share my location what
am I going to get over here in the browser.
I just get the location you are spit out in its entirety.
It would be much nicer to render this inside of a clickable link with the text showing like this is
my location.
There's no need to show the entire U.R.L. when a simple link would get the job done.
Now actually getting all of that done is going to require a small amount of restructuring.
We're going to create a separate event for those location based messages so a separate event that the
server will send to the client.
We're gonna talk about that in the next lesson and it will be your challenge to get done.
So let's jump right in to the next one.